Explore, Expand, Exploit, Exterminate abbreviated with 4X is a design scheme for video and tabletop games. 
If used correctly it gives the player great responsibility leaving him to make challenging descisions often which motivate and enhance engagement.
My thoughtprocess was, if we could use this type of design scheme to enhance engagement and interest not only in entertainment software but also in industry design software like the permaculture design desktop application.
The question now is how to incorperate such a concept.

First we need to define what systems we have, that we need to look for the problems we want to solve. 
Primarily the task would be to make everything more engaging. Designing a permaculture site is a difficult process, making it engaging and explorative would be greatly beneficiary in really being able to create whatever you like an being invested in what you create. 
Also we want to support the permaculture designer greatly with the intelligent systems provided by the software but he should still have every possibility to decide differently and even though he follows the systems advice and guidance he should feel like he made the descision on a information basis, making it possible to learn in every step of the way.

But there are some basic concepts that just have to fit together. You normally have different factions, working with or against each other. Then you have independant units like monsters and you have your own network of different unit that are specialized in different areas and must work great together.

On first sight you could try to model the interrelationships of the plant species, their beneficial and detremental cycles in such a way, where the benefacting plants are your faction and the detremental ones are the enemies. 

Doing it on this very small scale level would be a great way of getting comfortable with those bonds in a slow and steady way, giving you time to think about it for a long time.

Using this concept would also give me the chance to have a starting project. Because I have FreeOrion as an Open Source Basis i could just start there and firstly develop all the nessecary systems, from there i could work on the game design.

Even if it is just a small part in the learning section of the main program it might be good to explore this thought further.



